---
title: "Groundfish management procedure framework meeting"
output:
  pdf_document: default
date: '2019-07-18'
fontsize: 11pt
---

# Meeting objectives

Ensure everyone has an up-to-date understanding of the current status of the project and plans going forward.

Better understand Management needs from this framework.

Discuss governance for the project going forward (stakeholder engagement, performance objectives, satisficing rules, MP selection, etc.)

Get feedback on draft working paper structure, performance metrics, case study selection, format of advice, etc.

*Acronyms: MP: management procedure; OM: operating model*
<!-- PM: performance metric; DLMtool: an R package for data-limited methods (DLM) management strategy evaluation -->

# Meeting agenda

- Current status
   - Early draft of working paper
   - Draft closed-loop simulation objectives/performance metrics
   - Draft screening of MPs with existing operating models
   - Draft operating models for rex sole (case study), shortraker (case study), Pacific cod (to understand the operating model and MPs; likely not in this report)
   - Development of tools for getting our data into DLMtool formats, plotting oututs, defining operating models, generating CSAS reports
   - Exploring historical catch correction via machine learning models (shortraker)

- Timeline
   - Review in February before inside yelloweye

- Working paper structure
   - Introduction
   - Best practices for an MP framework
   - How this plan achieves those 
   - Case study one summary
   - Case study two summary
   - Discussion
      - Implicit knowledge of limit reference points
      - Format of the advice
      - Assessment frequency and triggers
      - Value of information
      - Rebuilding
   - Data-limited MPs considered
   - Screening a set of candidate MPs
   - DLMtool operating model summary
   - Provisional/default operating model values
   - Detailed case study OMs + MSE results

- MSE objectives and performance metrics
   - Timeframe of projections (50 years?)
   - Choice of performance metrics
   - Choice of short-term and long-term variants

- Current performance metrics:
   1. LT P40: Probability SB (spawning biomass) > 0.4 SB~MSY~ (years 36--50)
   2. LT P80: Probability SB > 0.8 SB~MSY~ (years 36--50)
   3. PNOF: Probability of not overfishing P(F < F/F~MSY~) (years 1--50)
   4. STY: Probability yield > 0.5 MSY (years 6--20)
   5. LTY: Probability yield > 0.5 MSY (years 36--50)
   6. AAVY: Probability that average annual variability in yield < 0.2 (years 1--50)
   
- Initial satisficing rule(s) and MP selection approach
   - Satisficing just based on LT P40?

- Case studies
   - Rex Sole and Shortraker Rockfish?
   - Rex Sole:
      - No aging data (but many otoliths) and tight survey CVs
      - Example of checking value of aging some otoliths
      - No TAC (uncontroversial, but less relevant?)
   - Shortraker Rockfish:
      - Dodgy aging data
      - Wide survey CVs (infrequently encountered)
      - Has TAC and an outstanding request for advice
      - Major catch uncertainty in early 1990s

- Format of advice and updates
   - Initially as a Research Document?
   - Science Response updates?
   - Schedule?

- Roles and responsibilities
   - Engagement with stakeholders to set decision context, satisficing rules, and MP selection
   - Leading stakeholder engagement?
   - Facilitators down the line?

- Format of operating model description
   - Transparent definition of every element in an appendix
   - Summary in main document

- Format of MSE outputs
   - See current figures
   - Historical run-up and parameterization of OM
   - Projection timeseries (B/B~MSY~, F/F~MSY~, catches, ...)
   - Performance metric probability table
   - Kobe B/B~MSY~ vs. F/F~MSY~ plots
   - Radar plots
   - ...?
   
- Application to multiple spatial regions
   - Most MPs work with a single index
   - Simplest to work with spatial regions linked to a single survey

- Application to related species simultaneously?
