# Technical Working Group meeting 2020-01-24

## In attendance:

- Sean Anderson
- Robyn Forrest
- Chris Grandin
- Dana Haggarty
- Quang Huynh (remote)
- Adam Keizer (remote)
- Paul Starr (remote)
- Comments submitted by Ashleen Benson and Rowan Haigh beforehand.

# Meeting notes

## General comments on the proposed MP Framework

Recommendations and agreed changes are bulleted. Suggestions and recommendations include those received by email prior to the meeting.

### Improving communication

The meeting began with some general comments on the framework and suggestions to improve communication about the details of the framework and improvements to the framework itself.

It is important to communicate clearly that reference points are integral to the MP framework, even if they are not explicitly known. The Precautionary Approach (PA) Framework and the new [Fish Stocks Provisions](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/f-14/page-3.html#h-1175547) of the Fisheries Act are clear that fish stocks in Canada should be managed so they are maintained at or rebuilt to above the Limit Reference Point (LRP). For data-limited stocks when it is not possible to estimate reference points, it will be necessary to develop decision-making processes that preserve the intent of the PA Framework and Fish Stocks Provisions, i.e., the MP Framework is designed to provide the science to support selection of management procedures (MPs) that provide a high probability of maintaining stocks above the LRP. 

There have been some concerns among stakeholders that the Framework could be too "generic", and a possible perception that the operating models (OMs) are not fit to any data. There was discussion of the trade-off between detailed customization of OMs vs development of more generic OMs, which could increase efficiency of including more stocks in the Framework. So far the authors have worked on highly customized OMs for the two case study species, Rex Sole (*Glyptocephalus zachirus*) and Shortraker Rockfish (*Sebastes borealis*). OMs are fit to available indices of abundance (and other available data, such as age-composition) and conditioned on catch data using an age-structured model implemented in the companion package to DLMtool, MSEtool. The OMs can be fit to data for stocks without age data as long as assumptions about selectivity and maturity are included. These could be based on selectivity and maturity from similar species or stocks, or be based on length data. In these cases, selectivity should be treated as an axis of uncertainty, i.e., alternative OMs should be developed. 

* It was recommended that the MP Framework start by focusing on customized OMs rather than generic OMs in its first applications. This could help managers and stakeholders with understanding and acceptance of the Framework. Over time, with familiarity, patterns may emerge and assessments could be conducted in similar ways.

* There was also a recommendation to discuss and document process of how species would be selected for data-limited assessment via the MP Framework and how a species could be moved out of the Framework to have more data-rich, conventional assessments. While the availability of quality age-composition data would be the first consideration, this will likely need to be done on a stock-by-stock basis, and in consultation with science, managers, stakeholders and other interested parties. 

Currently there may be an assumption among stakeholders that advice from the MP Framework is of a lower quality than a full stock assessment. This is not necessarily the case, as the OMs themselves are calibrated to observed data and are essentially stock assessments, even though they are limited by lack of data. For this reason, the authors recommend developing multiple OMs to include the major axes of uncertainty. The main difference between an MP Framework (or Management Strategy Evaluation (MSE) approach) and a conventional stock assessment is where the risk is evaluated. In MSE, decisions on risk metrics are built into the objectives and performance metrics, with uncertainty incorporated in the OMs. In a conventional stock assessment, decisions on risk are dealt with at the end via decision tables or similar. 

* The authors agreed to improve documentation of what the products of the MP Framework are and how they can be used.

* There was a recommendation to include discussion in the working paper of how alternative OMs would be treated in the management recommendations, for example, how would a decision proceed if an MP performs well (has acceptable trade-offs) under the reference set of OMs but performs poorly under the robustness OMs. Similarly, does performance under a worst-case OM scenario determine whether an MP is included as a management option? This would require some consideration of whether decision-making is risk-averse or risk-neutral and will require input from managers, stakeholders and other interested parties.

* There was discussion and agreement from the authors to include a section of recommendations for the implementation stage of the Framework, once an MP has been selected. Authors agreed that it will be important to monitor and compare OM projection results with future observations (i.e., survey indices) and determine when an OM re-evaluation should be triggered. For example when observed indices fall outside the CV of the predicted index beyond some agreed threshold. Tools for doing this are already available in the software. This is also important because recommending triggers for re-assessment is a CSAS requirement of most stock assessments and is included in the Terms of Reference for the Inside Yelloweye Rockfish Rebuilding Plan, which is first application of the MP Framework, due for CSAS review immediately after the MP Framework CSAS review.

### Discussion of projection period
There was a discussion on the reliability of projections for 50 (or more) years, especially for species like rockfishes.

* This led to a recommendation to improve OMs for rockfish species by allowing for episodic recruitment events in the projection years. This could be achieved using a "fat-tailed" probability distribution for recruitment deviations in the projections in one or more OMs, to investigate the impacts of episodic recruitment on performance of MPs.

There were several discussions related to the time periods for the projections.There is a question of whether to select short-term and long-term periods for performance metrics based on number of years or on fractions/multipliers of generation time. In the current proposed Framework, the authors used a 50-year projection period for the Rex Sole case study. However, provisional time windows for long-term conservation performance metrics should probably be based on some multiple of generation-time, with some consideration for using shorter possible windows (e.g., 1.5 generation time) for very long-lived rockfish species. 

* It was recommended that the projection period be determined on a stock-by-stock basis, with the length of the projection period identified as a decision point during initial development of the OMs for individual stocks.

### Objectives and Performance Metrics

Related to the above phase-in discussion, there was a comment that there could be an additional objective/performance metric related to the transition between current management recommendations and the 'best' MP, to measure stability of TACs at the beginning of the process.

There was a suggestion to also look at shorter-term conservation metrics (e.g., one generation time or shorter) to ensure MPs aren't initially crashing the stock before a slow recovery. These could be used as secondary performance metrics for diagnostic purposes. In general, metrics may be needed to capture dynamics early in the projection period.

There were comments that the authors' choice of a 20-year short-term period for yield-based performance metrics is not really short-term from a harvester's perspective. Six to ten years may be more appropriate for the definition of short-term. A medium-term yield metric was also suggested.

There was a discussion of whether the short-term yield (STY) and long-term yield (LTY) metrics should be relative to MSY or some agreed-upon average catch level, as MSY does not reflect how the multispecies groundfish fishery is managed and operated. Given there is some minimum catch required for multispecies fisheries to operate, it may also be important to include a catch floor in MPs, on a stock-by-stock basis. Industry could provide this number for case study stocks.

A suggestion was made that average annual variability in yield (AAVY) performance metric threshold could be based on historical variability for that fishery, i.e., be determined on a stock-by-stock basis. 

In general it was noted that many data-limited stocks will be incidentally-caught species, and therefore AAVY may be a less important metric for these stocks than for target stocks. Of more interest could be species that may act as choke species if the TAC for them is too low. For these species AAVY may indicate periods of low TAC, which could cause problems accessing target species. The authors agreed, and also noted that AAVY is a useful diagnostic of model behaviour (high AAVY may indicate MPs that are frequently closing the fishery), which could be masked by metrics such as average catch. 

Absolute average catch during some near-term window should also be reported, although it is already captured in the time series plots of the projection period. People agreed that absolute catch doesn't need to be part of the performance metric plots.

There was a question about whether performance metrics based on COSEWIC criteria could be considered for some stocks. The authors noted that these have already been included in DLMtool as part of an earlier DFO-UBC partnership. Rebuilding plan objectives are also being included for the Inside Yelloweye Rockfish rebuilding plan.

* The authors agreed that these could be illustrated in the MP Framework document for future users.

### Operating Models

* The authors agreed to include plots of the future index projections, as well as the historical indices already shown.

There was a discussion about whether to include wide ranges of uncertainty in individual OMs, and how many parameters should include uncertain ranges, given that uncertainty in key parameters is already being dealt with in alternative OMs in the reference and robustness sets. Sensitivity plots for Rex Sole suggest that there is relatively little sensitivity to many parameters within an OM, and this could be partly because the sampling space within individul OMs is too large, due to the number of parameters being assigned ranges of values rather than point values. 

* The authors agreed to investigate using smaller ranges of parameter uncertainty within OMs in different scenario OMs, which may be more transparent in terms of understanding the impacts of uncertainty in different parameters on relative performance of MPs.

* The authors agreed to look at how the von Bertalanffy *k* parameter is being treated, Sensitivity plots suggest it is being rounded to increments of 0.01.

* The authors also agreed to improve parameter names in the sensitvity plots (currently being pulled directly from DLMtool).

* There was a recommendation to be careful not to include implausible scenarios in the reference or robustness sets. For Rex Sole the increasing and decreasing *M* scenarios were included for illustration of the idea of the robustness set. The authors agreed to possibly remove the decreasing *M* scenario and provide some ecological rationale for the increasing *M* scenario (e.g. climate change), being very clear that the increasing *M* scenario is illustrative.

## Management Procedures

There was a discussion about how to deal with the "burn-in" or "phase-in" period at the very beginning of the projection period when the MP is applied for the first time, both in the simulations and in real applications of the MP. Suggestions included a "slow-up/fast-down" approach and maintaining status quo catches for a period at the beginning, although Fisheries Management stated that new MPs could likely be implemented quickly. This is not a decision for Science, although science could support the discussion through alternative simulations. It was noted that several of the Framework's MPs already have smoothers built into them. Other software, such as mseR, has a buffering parameter to smooth the transition of TACs between years. The Sablefish MSE and ICES MSE framework may also be useful resources for precedence on dealing with phasing in MPs.

* There was a recommendation to tune a smaller number of MPs to meet the conservation objective, then compare performance based on catch and other performance metrics, as this could better reflect the selection of MPs for a real fishery. This approach has been used for Sablefish and the Outside Yelloweye Rockfish rebuilding plan. This could be done as an alternative to the current approach in the MP Framework of testing a larger number of MPs with more generic tuning parameters. There was also a suggestion to look at the FishPath approach for triaging MPs.

<!-- Sean, you might want to improve the above paragraph in particular -->

* There was a recommendation to distinguish the reference MPs from the candidate MPs in various figures (e.g., in the projection plots), as the reference MPs are not real candidates for selection and should not be included in the ranking of MPs.

* The authors agreed to visually identify satisficed and reference MPs on the probability table/figure. A "satisficing threshold" line could also be added to the probability table/figure.

* There was a recommendation to remove the probability numbers from the probability table/figure and replace with dots if they meet satisficing criteria (and possibly 'X' if they do not). E.g., there is no relevance in the difference between probabilities of 0.97 vs 0.98.

Many of the final satisficed MPs showed very little contrast in performance for Rex Sole. This is partly because poorly-performing (or "unsatisficed") MPs had been filtered out already. There was a suggestion to focus on a final set of candidate set of MPs that present considerable contrast in their performance, although this might also be achieved through presenting example plots of unsatisficed MPs, to show decision-makers the process of simplifying the decision space. There was also a suggestion to select MPs that show contrast among OMs. 

<!-- Sean, Quang suggested the last sentence, I'm not sure I fully understand what this looks like from an implementation perspective, although it is similar to Paul's suggestion to select contrasting MPs. If you can improve this point, please do -->


## Case Studies

There was a suggestion to document co-caught species in the species background section, which may be helpful if it is necessary to borrow life-history and fishery information (e.g., parameters from a similar species caught at similar depth, or information about ration of retained:released fish).

### Rex Sole
It was noted that Rex are often referred to as "witches", and this should be included in the species background information.

* It was suggested that the value of 0.25 *y*^-1^ used in the High *M* scenario for Rex Sole could still be too low, based on the maximum observed age and the Hamel method for estimating *M*. The authors agreed to include a higher *M* scenario.

* There was a discussion on how to treat pre-1996 catches and agreement that the authors need to speak to industry on likely levels of misreporting pre-1996, and periods where there may have been incentives to misreport (e.g., in the early 1990s). The authors have already reached out and will follow-up.

* Similarly, the authors agreed to follow up with industry on reliability of the post-1995 CPUE series and whether to include a scenario that fits to it.

* There was a suggestion to investigate relative catches of Rex sole to other flatfish species (e.g., Rock Sole, Dover Sole, Petrale Sole ...), as this may be informative about historical (pre-1996) co-occurence of Rex Sole with more data-rich target species. There was also a suggestion to look at the meta-analysis of flatfishes by Sam Johnson (SFU).

### Shortraker Rockfish

* There was a recommendation to roll up the fishing events to trips for CPUE analysis, as there may not be enough data at the fishing event level. This is being done for some species in NZ.

## Agreed edits to the working paper

Participants made several useful suggestions to clarify the framework and improve the working paper. The authors agreed to:

* Standardize terminology for spider/radar/kite plots throughout.

* Standardize terminology for catch vs yield ... arguments were made in favour of both. Catch is a more accessible term. yield is consistent with terminology such as MSY, *F*~MSY~ and *B*~MSY~.

* Describe the dashed grey lines in the spider plots (these are reference MPs) or switch them to thinner grey lines.

* A mistake was noted in the documentation of the Fox equation (Eq A.20), which is undefined when n=1. The authors have corrected this.


